[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. [music] I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, we're in the media business.
>> That's right. That's right. Have you
ever had an article go viral?
Unexpectedly viral.
>> Yeah. I can't I'm like trying to like
remember like specifics, but yes. And
it's one of those things typically where
you're like really excited. It's like,
oh, a lot of people are, you know,
there's getting a lot of traction. Cool.
People are talking about this. And then
it goes like multiple orders of
magnitude bigger and you're like, oh,
this is like super weird and no context
for what this is. and you like sort of
want to hide in your home and like close
the laptop because then you sort of like
make it all go away and stuff like that.
Yes.
>> Yeah. It's kind of like once you release
it into the world, you don't actually
have a lot of control over how people
use it. And I think back to I wrote a
piece about some investors trying to
revive claims on Chinese imperial bonds,
like antique Chinese imperial debt from
the early 1900s. And somehow this went
absolutely viral in Hong Kong at the
time of the pro-democracy protest. So I
would walk down the street and I would
see these homemade banners that people
had created saying that China owes the
US like 20 billion in payments on old
debt. And it started like
>> absolutely surreal and like completely
unexpected because you you wouldn't
think that some like intricate debt
story was suddenly going to become a
pro-democracy protest slogan. But the
world works in mysterious ways. And
speaking of the world working in
mysterious ways, there is something that
went viral this week. We are recording
on February 27th. And if you haven't
heard of this particular thing, you have
probably been living under the
proverbial rock,
>> right? So, past OddLots's guest James
Van Gilen co-authored a piece on his uh
Substack Satrini Research Talk about a
potential AI doom scenario, which a lot
of people talk about, and there's been a
lot of talk about mass white collar
displacement as a possible thing that
could happen as AI gets adopted, etc.
But, you know, we know that the market's
been very skittish about this
specifically. We've been seeing the
software stock sell off all year, which
we've talked about plenty on the
podcast, and the some of the private
insurers and all of this. And something
about this moment and this particular
piece, I think it came out on Sunday,
last Sunday, landed with a sort of like
unbelievable thud. And so, it evidently
started moving markets on Monday. And
then throughout the week and this is the
part that really flabbergasted me was
you see like all these banks and every
economists etc like weighing in and many
of them very critical and like citadel
securities which I didn't even know they
like publish stuff because that's just a
market maker like they put out all this
stuff. So like responding to it or
trying to take it out. It was a as a
market story and a media story a wild
week.
>> It has become the discourse duour.
There's actually a prediction market on
it which you were telling me about a few
minutes ago. Like this thing has just
become much bigger than the initial
Substack which to me again says much
more about the nervousness of the market
and how little anyone actually knows
about how AI is going to unfold at the
moment that people are so keen to just
like latch on to any scenario that comes
out. I get these notes from like
sellside or research shops and they're
like clients have been asking us about
the Catrini scenario and it's just like
wow this is wild like this really like
>> that's right people calling up capital
economics being like I manage a
portfolio of 100 billion and I am
concerned about a substack okay well we
should talk to the author of this
substack and as you said we've had him
on a number of times before often
talking about AI it is of course James
Van Gilan the founder of Catrini
Research so James thanks so much for
coming back on the podcast
>> thanks for having Okay, why don't we
start with what Catrini research
actually is and what it is that you
actually do in some of your other
enterprises because I think this has
become also a source of confusion or at
least interest for people who are
reading this.
>> Satrini research is a pure investment
research firm. We focus primarily on
thematic equity and macro research. The
progression of it was I started it as a
newsletter just speaking about stocks
and bonds and whatever else and as we
had a kind of string of good calls which
you were kind enough to have us on with
the GLP1 early July 2023 I think it was.
>> Yeah, that was a great call.
>> Yeah. And the first piece we ever
published was a piece that was very
bullish on the AI infrastructure
complex.
>> So that's been a area that AI robotics
has been a big area for us in terms of
thematic equity. Uh we've kind of
covered this winding road of bottlenecks
uh in terms of optics, memory, power,
whatever else you can possibly allude
to. We've probably covered from a what
stories are people telling about the
movements that are going on in stocks. I
remember the last time that I was on
OddLotss, it was about this massive
Stargate data center buildout. Yeah. And
Joe was very surprised to see that
Caterpillar was uh and and I think very
happy that the old economy was getting a
bit of a boost. [laughter]
>> He's an old economy stand. That's right.
And Really, that's what we've been doing
for the past three years. I've built out
the team, and this piece very much was
just a response to what the market has
done year-to- date, which is bonds have
rallied, software companies have gotten
sold off, a lot of fintech companies
have gotten sold off, private equity has
sold off, and we're always kind of
looking for the cohesive narrative that
can connect disperate market moves. And
the pieces co-author Alupab posed to me
a question which was we've been focused
on the bullishness surrounding AI
infrastructure for a while and it's
translated into this capability curve
that is moving a lot faster than anyone
could expect. If you imagine this
exponential analogy chart, it's just a
diagonal line. It goes up and to the
right. People have been trying to put
sigmoids or kind of level that that
curve off for a long time and it hasn't.
So we basically drew that line out and
said what could be the implications of
this happening. It's a scenario which we
would ascribe maybe 10 15% towards and
it comes from a place of everybody talks
about equity markets being
forwardlooking but really a lot more of
what you see is people justifying
historical moves with new narratives
that they come up with afterwards. very
little of it is driven by let me think
of potential future outcomes. As an
investor, which was the audience that
this was meant to go out to, I feel a
lot more comfortable when I can envision
the bull [clears throat] case, the bare
case, the base case. And the most
uncomfortable that you can be as an
investor is when you can't see the bare
case at all. So, every time that we get
into a market that's similar to this,
people start asking, "What if this time
is different?" M
>> and I guess the thing that this piece
did differently was it asked what if
this time is different but not so much
in a SKH and Micron are going from price
to book to price to earnings but in a
way where what if this time is different
where the period of transition has to
respond to a very very fast accelerating
capability curve and you start from a
place where there's a strong kind of
historical precedent for the past
century or or two centuries, every time
you've had a technological revolution,
it's been great. It's been awesome. And
you see that when you go from 95% of the
population working in agriculture to 5%
of the population and you create all
these amazing jobs, but it happens over
a period of 50 years. And now we have
this capability curve where you go from
2 minutes, agents are capable of 2
minutes of autonomy on intellectually
complex tasks and now depending on who
you ask, it's 8 to 16 hours. And that's
happened in 2 years. That is an
exponential curve. What happens when we
get to multi-day, you know, uh what
happens when we get to multi-week? And
really the core of this is if this
capability curve continues being as fast
and exponential as it is, what does the
world look like? There are a lot of very
good reasons why that capability curve
could level off, but that is the core of
the argument. I do think that's just
like an important sort of level set for
people here which is that the progress
that we've seen since chat GPT came out
whenever that was late 2022 has exceeded
all of the expectations of everyone who
was working on it at the time including
the people who are in the space and the
most bullish and like the true believers
and there are various like measures and
stuff but you know you mentioned the
length of time you know that it could
replicate a human focus on stuff like
all the people like they made like these
bets, right? And there were even
prediction markets on their
capabilities. And so like as you say,
like it seems very plausible that the
gains will level out in some way or that
perhaps simple computer tasks don't
actually replace a lot of white collar
work because there's more to white color
work than what could be done on a
computer including personality and all
kinds of stuff. All of that seems very
plausible and I probably even buy some
of that. But this point that you make
it's like yeah sure but it is still
improving very fast
>> and it's it's something where the
overall trend of the cost of inference
per cognitive task has gone down so
significantly maybe depending on the
forecast 10 to 30 times over the past
year and a task that was uneconomical in
the first quarter 26 might cross that
threshold in the third quarter. And the
other interesting thing is this
capability gap where AI is capable of a
lot of things and a lot of people don't
know that it's capable of that right so
is it about the capability improving or
is it about people becoming more
familiar with that and as AI
infrastructure it's been a great trade
and it continues to stay tight and I
think the best rebuttal to this piece
has been well I think Gavin Baker made
this point which is the world is short
on Watson waivers and that's True.
Absolutely true. But technological
revolutions are volatile, right?
Improvements come from places that you
don't really expect them to. And I think
you can't fully underwrite the idea that
there aren't algorithmic improvements or
there aren't improvements to the compute
infrastructure. So we should look at
okay, if this capability curve continues
improving, what are the downstream
impacts there? And has the financial
system ever been stress tested for a
scenario like this? Because even if it
takes 5 years, even if it takes seven
years, eventually we will get there. And
that's not a bearish take. It's a very
bullish take. I think that there will be
great opportunities that arise because
of AI. But that's not to say that there
won't be a period of transition. And the
faster that it comes, the more
aggressive that transition is. And I
think the point of the piece really was
to get comfortable with what monitoring
that looks like. And I'll just make the
point that the piece also starts out
with an S&P that goes to 8,000 because
AI infrastructure is a very bullish
trade that makes up a lot of the the
index. And that's that's a very strong
and very momentum having trade right
now. And it ends with the reminder that
it's still February 2026. But in the
middle of it, it says, "How do we kind
of get comfortable with the non-mediacy
of the replacement?" If a company
decides whether they're doing it because
AI's gotten better or because the market
likes it when they cut jobs, what is
>> which we're seeing already,
>> which we saw with Block last night.
>> And you can argue whether that's because
of AI or whether that's because of uh
overhiring during COVID. But Kanes said
that by the end of the century we'd have
a 15-hour work week and he was wrong.
And there's a lot of ex you have to kind
of look at why he was wrong. There are a
few explanations. David Greyber says
that uh we just kind of created all
these bull jobs. Uh this is the title of
the book. I'm not cursing.
>> People have said worse on this podcast.
[laughter]
The other explanation is that you know
human wants and desires you can't really
model for and we will create whatever we
need to fill that at the same time that
required mechanisms by which humans kind
of are involved in the process of making
those machines better. It's kind of not
necessarily in every scenario concurrent
with the idea of a piece of software
that has the ability for recursive
improvement. This isn't to say that
tomorrow every single company in large
enterprise goes out and replaces half
their workforce, but you do have to take
a holistic picture, which is everybody
in in venture capital has been talking
about who's going to be the first
oneperson unicorn because of agentic AI.
I don't know if we're there yet. I
haven't really kept on top of that, but
that does seem like something plausible
to me. And I think one of the better
lines of the Citadel Securities
counterargument, yeah, was recursive
capability doesn't imply recursive
adoption. That's [clears throat]
extremely true. The S-curve framework
though is kind of describing the wrong
variable. And it's a variable that's
really important when you don't just
have incumbents adopting, but you have
startups threatening. And that variable
is not necessarily breadth of adoption,
it's intensity of adoption and
capability of adoption. So you might
have a flattening out S-curve and the
seats that you've already enabled with
these AI tools are just constantly
getting better. And so that is, you
know, the the other thing is the S-curve
is very kind of related to consumer
adoption of new technologies. And what I
would ask is was there an S-curve for
the adoption of spellch check? Everybody
already had a PC. Everybody already had,
you know, word processing software. It
was kind of added as a feature. There
are a lot of people in the world today
that have no clue how to use chat GPT
that are using AI every single day. It's
probably what is going to recommend you
this podcast. It's probably what is
making these decisions of what items you
see when you go on Amazon. So, if these
agent capabilities are introduced as
features to a technology that everyone
has already adopted, you have to adjust
your model for that. [music]
>> [music]
>> I have so many things to say about this,
but first of all, there's something very
dystopian about living in a world where
like the upside is well, we have a lot
of [__] jobs in existence already,
and so maybe some of those bull jobs
will continue to exist even with AI. But
the other thing is like the
self-reinforcing nature of AI seems
really important to me in the sense that
as you pointed out, James, like it's not
necessarily that people have to go out
and find these new capabilities
themselves. It's that the technology
itself that they're maybe already using
just to substitute search or something
like that can do it on their behalf. And
so you just get this feedback cycle
where like one AI thing creates new AI
things and it just builds and builds on
itself.
>> I really would be remiss if I didn't say
this again, which is a lesson that I've
learned over the past uh 5 days that uh
you can put something in all caps, you
can bold it and people will still not
read it. But maybe this is different cuz
I'm speaking. My base case is probably a
lot closer to a lot of the people
rebutting this article than the article
itself. The point of this really was to
explore what the bare case is. If we
continue to have a very bullish world in
AI infrastructure, I think that any
investor that reads it and thinks and
you know disagrees with half of the
things that we say maybe agrees with
half of it and forms a more nuanced
understanding of what to watch out for.
That's kind of our job. So this is
important and people who haven't read
the piece should know that like right up
front you do say this. You say this
piece is not a forecast. This is a
possible scenario and how it could go.
And we're going to get into some of the
details. But you know, one
counterargument to sort of the idea of
macroeconomic doom or financial crisis
or whatever is okay, if you have AI and
it's driving incredible productivity
gains, if it's very disinflationary and
so forth, if some people are becoming
fabulously wealthy in part of this big
redistribution that would uh happen,
well then the government has a lot more
fiscal capacity to stabilize this,
right? Then the government can spend a
lot of money. Rates have come down. they
can counteract the disinflation, not
totally unlike perhaps COVID would be
like a great example, but it strikes me
as like, well, if we're ever going to
have a government that's thinking about
these things proactively, that strikes
me as a good reason to write them out.
And it's notable like that many of the
executives at the top AI labs, they talk
about exactly this. In fact, it seems
like they're pleading almost with the
government to take this more seriously
because if we're going to have this big
disruption and redistribution, we're
going to have to start thinking about
what are the fiscal mechanisms to
counter it out.
>> 100%. I think that it's something where
it's perfectly fine and good to say that
the government will be able to deal with
it, but it's probably better to
formulate a framework in which the
government is more able to do that. And
in order to do that, you kind of have to
have an idea of what to keep track of.
And I can say that in the discourse that
I've seen, I don't think that there's a
very strong kind of data collection on
this specifically. One of the big
rebuttals has been that software job
postings have gone up 11%
year-over-year. Those job postings
include AI and machine learning
engineers. So you're really seeing a
composition shift where these new, you
know, AI engineers are coming in and
they're creating software that will
improve itself. And when it comes to the
government response, Joltz doesn't
really speak about composition. In my
opinion, there's not a great amount of
data on white collar specifically. And
yeah, it was it was it was almost
worrying in itself to see this reaction
where we write this article that's kind
of saying what I think most people are
thinking. We're putting trillions of
dollars at the white collar productivity
machine and oh that might, you know,
have some level of disruption. And I get
it. The thing that I'm very thankful to
a lot of the rebuttals for is that
they've reminded people that it's 2026,
which we tried to do three times in the
piece, but apparently we're not
successful. Thank you to everyone that
remind that that made sure that this
isn't like a spin out crazy uh whatever.
But the worrying side is well everyone
seems very very comfortable that this is
all going to be okay. And I think that
that reasonably I I'm also a student of
financial history. That reasonably comes
from when you look back at the past and
you say, well, we had this industrial
revolution and it was amazing and we've
had mechanization and it was amazing and
we've had the internet and it was
amazing and it created all these jobs
that we couldn't have possibly foreseen
beforehand. And you're looking at that
from a 100red or or more years in the
future. We have the term lite because of
the fact that the transition was so
abrupt and marketked that people were
moved to physical violence. Right? We
don't want that to happen. The
transitions do occur. And the faster
that this happens, if this were going to
happen over the next 20 or 30 years,
fine. What you know that that's going to
be great. Everything's going to be
awesome. I think that the the real time
frame is closer to 5 to 15. And
obviously this piece extrapolates where
it's three years. We should be prepared
for anything because the the the
government isn't going to accurately
forecast technological advancement, but
they can accurately forecast what they
should watch and what the best policy
response would be.
>> Yeah, this is the thing. The Leites were
like ultimately on the wrong side of
history in terms of thinking that
resistance to new technology would
actually matter. But that doesn't mean
that there wasn't major resistance and
disruption on the way there
>> and that it wasn't absolutely awful.
right from their perspect from their
lives.
>> Exactly. You know, you mentioned
software job openings still rising and
one of the reasons that's able to happen
is because we still have a financial
system that up until relatively recently
has been very comfortable with extending
credit to software companies and there's
obviously a reflexivity between the
financial system, the market and the
real economy. And you dig into that in
your piece as well. And this is the part
of it that I actually found the most
interesting where you describe how AI
could actually and the disruptive
effects of AI could actually end up
becoming problematic especially for
private capital. And this again is
something that is very much in the
public/market psyche this week because
we've had a number of private credit
blowups starting to become public. talk
a little bit more about how you see that
kind of private credit AI disruption now
insurance as well nexus unfolding
>> just to reiterate I don't see it
[laughter] unfolding
but I think this wasn't like a singling
out of private credit it was very much a
response to the price action of the
market but it is something worth
considering that it's a relatively new
in the grand scheme of things and
there's a system that's built upon the
assumption that things stay relatively
stable and if things aren't relatively
stable then what could possibly happen?
We're not really private credit
analysts, right? We're thematic equity
and and macro research. This was
something uh where we presented kind of
if you were to have a a wave of defaults
in one of these disrupted industries,
what would happen? And then the other
thing is maybe the job losses are fine
and we go back to a economy like the
1950s where the participation rate is
much lower but productivity is much
higher. That's great, too. In the
transition, the people that are at the
highest risk of being replaced by AI
have like 780 FICO scores and they're
not classically what gets modeled as a
risk in terms of a default. So, these
are all things where it's not saying
that this is going to happen. It's
saying has private credit lending and
and you know, to their credit, I will
say Apollo much earlier to the software
thing than than even I was or or the
market was right. Apollo reduced their
software lending pretty early on. I
think it was uh in in early 2025
>> the for the rest of it you know like has
there been enough changes to the
assumptions about the income and about
you know does ARR stay recurring? That's
just something to consider I think.
>> What's your base case on private credit
then? Is it the sort of Jamie Diamond
cockroach scenario? So I think that
private credit isn't banking, right? The
like run on the bank dynamic doesn't
necessarily play out. They are in
possession of permanent capital to a
certain degree and and that's through in
a lot of areas the acquisition of these
life insurers. So I think you could
definitely see the contagion being very
minimized if there were to be uh I don't
think there have been any like very
highprofile blowups yet. Everything's
pretty much fine as right now as I
understand it. the progression of it
though, I don't think that you're at a
very high risk. My base case would be
just like that. And the only kind of
added risk is if you were to have some
sort of change to how private credit is
treated from a regulatory perspective on
the balance sheet of these lifeurers. So
there's sort of two major components to
the piece that you wrote and one is
obviously the macro scenario and the way
it's framed is like okay the year is
2028 unemployment is above 10% the stock
market has fallen 40%. So there's the
macro story but then there's also the
sort of secular micro story and I think
this is really interesting and this is
the part that I've been like trying to
work out and trying to understand
better. this idea that like there are
all these businesses that have
essentially been built up around
building a moat based on network
effects, you know, payments platforms
and so forth and whatever. And so this
idea that AI and agentic commerce will
fundamentally change the way a lot of
these businesses operate and these modes
will disappear. and talk to us about
that because I have a harder time
wrapping my head around what is it about
AI per se that's like here you have
these legacy networks delivery drivers
payment companies with whatever they
have on the desk and you swipe your card
and stuff like that what are those
called little
>> point of sale
>> what little point of sale machines but
talk to us about like just from a pure
tech standpoint what is it about agentic
AI that can sort evaporate this mode.
>> So, I will say if I had to go back in
time and write the piece differently,
okay, I would not have singled that. I
would have just kept it on a sector
basis, right? And uh I think that if I
knew that it was going to get 30 million
views, I would not have mentioned single
stocks at all. So, I won't do that here.
Uh but what I will say is and this
future could be wrong but if you
envision a future where I remember
talking to you guys about this in 2024
when uh uh I was using it as a uh
bullcase for Apple which didn't end up
coming you know they they Apple was kind
of uh let the chips fall where they may
and then we'll come in afterwards which
they've done a lot in in the past 10
years but the idea is you have this
agentic assistant and it's in your phone
and it knows everything about you and
then you kind extrapolate that to a lot
of people spend a decent amount of time
shopping. What they don't spend a lot of
time doing is price matching. If you're
going to buy a box of protein bars, you
don't really check five different
vendors because it's tedious. AI agents
do not experience tedium, right? So, the
kind of way that there are a lot of
layered intermediation
and and rent kind of extraction layer in
the economy. And then there are a lot of
places where having a like an oligopoly
essentially has allowed margins to
really be artificially increased. So
just to address I don't think that code
is the moat on a delivery network for
like like uh like that's you have the
drivers you have uh the customers. I I I
get that. What I could see happening is
something that's already kind of
happening where these startups are
enabled to create something that's
similar and well you don't have the
network effect. Okay. But if you have an
AI agent that has the explicit
instructions to go out and find the
cheapest option, then it doesn't really
care about using this thing that has a
network effect. It cares about using the
thing that's the cheapest. So if you
have an order aggregator that's an
agentic kind of aggregator on the driver
side and the customer side then the
customer says to the agent, hey I want
this burrito from Chipotle and then uh
there's a bunch of different platforms
that the listing is on because the
restaurant has used one of these agentic
aggregators to go on every single one
and put their thing and the driver also
has the one that will get them paid the
most. So the idea of you know taking
half of the delivery fee as the company
kind of goes away because your margin is
my opportunity and someone that's five
people that's kind of coding up this
maybe shoddy replacement is is very
happy to you know obviously there are
other modes here but that's just one
example of how you might see a world in
which agent commerce and the it's very
similar to like the paperclip problem.
If you tell a machine to do something,
it's just trying to get you the best
price
>> and maybe that includes finding a way
around interchange.
>> Just to push back on this or just to
pressure, I mean like comparison
shopping websites have existed for a
long time almost since the beginning of
the internet, right? And you know in
theor you could Google I don't know this
like Google shop had a thing for a
while. I don't think people ever that
ever took off, but you know, it' show
you like here's the price of a computer
monitor on Amazon and Walmart.com and
neweag.com and a few of these sites that
like don't exist anymore, etc. Like in
theory, like isn't that describing the
same thing that like from the customer's
perspective, it's like, okay, I'll just
they're all the same. I I'm going to
click the cheapest.
>> Totally. I I I get that and that's an
entirely possible case. What I will say
is there's a big difference between
actively going and and taking the effort
and taking the time to uh go to one of
these comparison shopping sites to get
the best price versus just telling your
phone, "Get me a burrito. Get me the
best price."
>> Right? Th those are they're they're two
kind of fundamentally different things.
This will play out over the next 5 or 10
years and we'll see. And also, I'm sure
that we're not going to just delete
friction overnight, right?
Uh so that's why it was so shocking to
see this kind of like immediate
reaction. It's like not this stuff
hasn't happened yet and we don't know
exactly how it's going to happen. It's
just a future scenario where things
happen a certain way.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Can you talk to us for a second just
where you see AI valuations at the
moment? Because I think this is also
part of the reason that people are very
nervous at the moment which is like okay
on the one hand we think AI is going to
eat the world but on the other hand it's
not entirely clear that a lot of AI is
going to make money in doing so and if
you look at you know some of the big
hyperscalers at the moment they're still
losing money on certain power users. So
how do we think that AI is actually
going to make money as it sort of eats
the world? I think that that's the other
thing that's important here is these
companies need to go out and search for
ROI and there are a lot of threats you
saw anthropic respond to the Chinese
distillation of models and you know if
you go and you use Miniax it's
relatively comparable but it's also 90%
cheaper so this is like a there is a
race happening right now and the
economics are they span the gamut right
good and bad on both sides. The thing
that drives this kind of uh capability
improvement is you do need customers to
pay for these things that you have spent
so much money on and that means making
it capable in a way that's useful to
your customers or integrating it in a
way that's useful to your customers. So
I personally think that that will
happen. How quickly it happens is
anybody's guess, but I think valuations
right now are reflective of this
expectation that we are going to
continue adding compute capacity to be
able to handle this. And I think that if
you spend 8 hours just thinking about
it, you can see a lot of places where AI
is pretty valuable. But a lot of those
places are places where you might
otherwise pay a human right now.
[snorts] So yeah, it's just you just
have to balance it. And there's a lot of
uh ways that it can go well and then
there's a couple ways that it doesn't.
>> Let's talk about enterprise software for
a second because okay the public facing
these modes these network effects etc.
Maybe AI agents allow us to get the best
price wherever is it different economics
if we're saying the enterprise the SAS
selloff etc. What is the scenario? How
would you articulate the the fear in the
market right now that all of these
incumbent software companies could
theoretically get ripped out because
something something AI will make it so
that customers don't need them.
>> So you can separate software you have
kind of like this long tale of SAS that
includes these uh you know workflow
automation tools and then you have like
the systems of record. I think that it's
very likely that the at least the
systems of record have like a short
squeeze in the sense that right now uh
they kind of just have upside in that
they are they are most situated to be
able to improve their margins because of
AI,
>> right? Because coding is a cost for
them, right? It's like they [laughter]
can they can theoretically maintain
these things much cheaper than the
other.
>> Yeah, 100%. And what we said in the
piece which will be, you know,
interesting to see in real life and I
don't necessarily it's a good point that
enterprises don't really react as
quickly as this. So the timeline is
probably aggressive but the way that
these uh kind of contracts are
negotiated last year when you had the
first half the kind of budget resetting
these CIOS and procurement teams they
agentic AI was still kind of a buzzword
right it wasn't until the end of
November that it became insane you know
I saw you have vibe coded a couple
things yourself so there was
>> something cool coming out next week
>> nice [laughter]
uh there was a great kind of jump in
capability what is it by By the way, are
you kidding to speak about it or
>> No, he can't. [laughter]
>> It requires some finesse. I think
>> this is the thing like I used to blame
Joe for the SAS selloff, right? Cuz he
was the one vibe coding and publicizing
vibe coding, but now we can all blame
situ.
You're welcome. [laughter]
But the the strategy that's been adopted
by OpenAI is very similar to Palunteer
where they say we have these forward
deployed engineers and we're just going
to install them at your place. And so
maybe you know I don't necessarily think
that enterprises are going to jump to
vibe code their own system of record.
But what I do think is that when you
have these sales teams that call up
their customers and say, "Hey, remember
last year we said this was what
inflation was, and then we added a
couple percent on top of that, so you're
getting a 5% price increase. All good.
Okay, you're not going anywhere because
you don't have anywhere else to go."
Done. Now the person on the other side
of the phone can say, you know, Open AI
called me the other day. Even if they're
bluffing, right? So, so you do see some
like some potential downside to pricing
power
>> and that's that's in the places where
it's very unlikely that these vibecoded
alternatives actually pose a threat. And
then you see uh it's been interesting
how anthropic has handled it where
they've recognized this capability gap
where they say oh these pe the people
don't really understand what the these
tools can do. So they've started
releasing like suites of AI tools. I
don't know if you saw the wealth
management one, right? It's they
released the wealth management one I
think a couple days ago. It's like you
could have done this yourself with
Claude Customs.
>> This is a really good point and I hadn't
really thought of it in that terms cuz
these things that like Claude announced
or Anthropic releases something, they're
not that incredible in some sense, but
they're essentially just very simple
reminders. You hadn't thought to use
this for,
>> you know, modeling various retirement
scenarios. Actually, it's very simple.
You could do that. You hadn't thought to
use this. So like because they're
simple, they're like markdown files.
They're not like particularly exotic
pieces of software, but they are
reminders that this thing you didn't
think of. Yeah. Just do it.
>> It's like a thing that you can use to
hammer your supplier over the head with,
right?
>> Yeah. I don't know exactly what the
timeline that that happens on, but there
are going to be adjustments to pricing
power because of it. And yeah, it seems
that this is kind of the reason why in
the beginning I thought that framing the
piece this way was valuable to our
client base and reader base was because
as an investor, you don't really care if
you're presented with 10 scenarios and
nine of them are wrong if one of them
makes you money, right? So I I obviously
knew that that some people uh who had
already bought the dip in software would
disagree with the software part but
maybe they would agree with the you know
uh with the the disintermediation part
but then it kind of escaped containment
and in retrospect if I was going to
write a piece for broad distribution it
would probably be pretty optimistic
because I'm a pretty optimistic guy like
uh so yeah that's been an interesting
experience.
>> What was the most surprising thing from
this week for you? Well, I had someone
that uh that really strongly disagreed
with me and then when I asked why uh
sent me a claude readout [laughter]
the uh the Kelshi. It's cool that uh
there's a
>> you can use this as a hedge for like
your
>> There's now an instrument which wait
let's see Kelchi I'm going to look it up
Kelchi Catrini scenario
if you start typing in Kelshi and then
start the word see it autofill catrini
scenario. Will this I love that. Will
the catrini scenario happen? said 11.6%.
>> Is that basically the rate that you
would get if you put it in the money
market?
>> It probably is. So this [laughter] is
Can I read the specifications of the
contract?
>> Fine print matter.
>> Summary. So if at least three of
unemployment rate exceeds 10% per the
BLS, S&P 500 declines more than 30% from
its closing level of issuance.
>> That's weird terminology. Zillow home
index declines more than 10% and then
you have New York City, LA, San
Francisco, Chicago, Houston, Phoenix.
labor share of GDI falls below 50% and
CPU falls below 0%. If any of those
three things happen, then the Catrini
scenario is
>> that's crazy because like most of that
is just a financial crash, right? Like
it's not even necessarily tied to AI.
>> It's cool. Like do you like that?
There's like this is now going to be
known as a Triny [laughter] scenario
forever. Like when like when we get the
next crisis, what whenever people like
this is like an omen?
I I feel like uh anybody consider like I
feel like you could make a lot more
money on TLT calls with if if three of
these things get hit. But um
>> there's $125,000
been traded in this market. So it's
[laughter] still pretty minor
>> deep liquidity.
>> You can't right you can't probably hedge
you can't hedge your whole life or
[laughter] you know your whole
portfolio. But you know
>> if I was going to pick a thing I'd be
known for it probably would have been
not this. Yeah.
>> But you know you don't get to pick. So,
I I still stand by what we've written
and I think that it's uh as a scenario
useful to consider.
>> All right, James, thank you for coming
on during a [music] very busy and I'm
sure surreal week for you.
>> Thank you for having me.
[music]
>> All right, Joe. I I'm very glad we got
James on to discuss that because
obviously this is the talking point of
the week at least. It is just
fascinating from a media perspective how
you can have these viral pieces that
kind of get out into the world and
develop a life of their own. But
obviously
>> the major point of interest in all of
this is these are the things that the
market seems to be actively considering
at the moment. Right.
>> Paul Krugman wrote a good piece. He
disagreed with a lot of it, but he
pointed out, you know, when uh the radio
broadcast of World of the Worlds
happened and a bunch of people panicked
because they thought there was some big
invasion, it occurred in the environment
of a very it was like, you know, during
the depression.
>> Yeah. Of like existential dread.
>> And look, like this is the worry that
has been people have been talking about
all year, long before this piece. And so
like the whole reason people are like
talking about oh all these software
companies that have thrived forever the
reason why they're many of them are at
all-time lows is because of like wow
people are very impressed with the
capabilities and you have a lot of
people talking about the potential for
mass white collar layoffs and so
therefore you know I read it as a sort
of let's put this all together and to
the point it's like you want to be
thinking about scenarios particularly
from the public sector response like
let's actually talk about what this
could look like it strikes me as a
useful exercise Right. And the reaction
itself is informative. Yeah. Totally.
Right. So again, we should not be in an
environment where you can have a think
piece, a single scenario that actually
causes a broad sell-off that lots of
people start like pinning on this
particular piece. And likewise, we
shouldn't really be in a scenario where
Citadel Securities publishes a rebuttal
and then everything starts rallying. All
it underscores is that no one really
knows anything at the moment.
>> This is on tent hooks, right? like
there's like people are extremely
stressed and know what it's you know
it's like this is genuinely it's
uncharted territory. It's uncharted to
have a technology that is improving as
fast as it is. It's uncharted to have it
you know it's not like one lot one
specific industry is the threat. It's
like a broad range. No one knows where
it's going to be. So it's like people
are like deeply anxious about it and it
articulated a lot of views and it landed
at a moment where this was just top of
mind for everyone. The one last thing
I'll say about this is I'm really glad
you asked about policy because this also
seems to be the wild card in this entire
discussion which is like
>> the outcome of all of this could end up
being very different depending on what
policy makers actually decide to do
about it. And so far we haven't really
seen any like not even early signs of
how people are thinking about this.
There's virtually no discussion in DC
about anything substantive related to
like the actual impacts of AI. There's
almost none. And there's it's this very
weird chasm that's opened up between how
much of a big deal so many people are
thinking about this and how politicians
like don't talk about anything but this.
It's very strange. It's actually it's
starting to get uh pretty surreal on
that.
>> Yeah. All right. Well, shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> Okay. This has been another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Aloway. [music]
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
James Van Gillan. He's at Catrini7.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman Dashel Bennett at Dashbot.
And Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. [music]
And for more OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
for the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss. [music]
And if you enjoy OddLotss, if you like
it when we talk about the AI doom
scenario [music] of 2028, then please
leave us a positive review on your
favorite podcast platform. And remember,
[music] if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast [music] and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Yeah.
[music]
Hey. [music]